terraform init:


Downloads all plugins associated with the defined provider

terraform plan:
Shows what it will create or destroy as mentioned in the file.


terraform apply:
To actually apply the changes shown in plan.

==

when we run terraform init, plugins needed for the provider are automatically downloaded and saved locally in .terraform directory. size of .terraform ~~ 300 MB


In below snippet, aws_instance is resource type and myec2 is a given local name. Local name can be anything. resource name is fixed. It is an identifier for a given resource and must be unique , for identification purpose.



resource "aws_instance" "myec2" {
    ami = "ami-00c39f71452c08778"
    instance_type = "t2.micro"
}

Types of primary providers in terraform.

official- owned,maintained by Hashicorp
partner- owned, mainted by tech company , having partnership with Hashicorp
communite-owned,maintained by Individual Contributors.

Namespaces are used to help users identify the organization or publisher for the integration.

official - hashicorp
partner- third party org , eg akamai/akamai
creatorco-dev/1password


if you create infra via terraform. then delete it via AWS console. and then run terraform refersh, terraform will refresh the statefile as per the current infra state.


if you run terraform destroy , ALL the resources which are part of the folder from which command has run will be destroyed.

To delete only specific resource, add -target flag.

terraform destroy -target aws_instance.myec2

The -target option can be used to only focus Terraform's attention on just a subset of resources.

Also, if we comment out the specific resource block ( which already exists in the actual infra ) , terraform will assume that we want to destroy that resource.

terraform apply -auto-approve ( does not ask for user input yes/no to apply changes)

State File: ( terraform.tfstate ). Its format is json. 
Stores info about managed infra in a state file. 
It is like a Database , storing infra spec.

Note: Never modify state file manually. It can lead to file corruption and will make it difficult for terraform to track infra. Take its backup.

eg if a new EC2 instance gets created via terraform, all that EC2 instance's config gets stored in the state file ( like instance-id, instance-type, sg, volume-type, private-ip etc)

scenario:
if there are two .tf files for creating EC2 instaces, having below contents:

provider "aws" {
  region     = "eu-west-2"
}

resource "aws_instance" "myec2" {
    ami = "ami-002aab1cab5a08e35"
    instance_type = "t2.micro"
    subnet_id     = "subnet-092b16d9bceaefe8d"
}


and 


provider "aws" {
  region     = "eu-west-2"
}

resource "aws_instance" "myec3" {
    ami = "ami-002aab1cab5a08e35"
    instance_type = "t2.micro"
    subnet_id     = "subnet-092b16d9bceaefe8d"
}

and we run terraform plan, it gives the error:

╷
│ Error: Duplicate provider configuration
│
│   on second-ec2.tf line 1:
│    1: provider "aws" {
│
│ A default (non-aliased) provider configuration for "aws" was already given at first-ec2.tf:1,1-15. If multiple
│ configurations are required, set the "alias" argument for alternative configurations.


Resolution: Remove provider section from one of the .tf files.
provider "aws" {
  region     = "eu-west-2"
}

How it behaves: It will merge both the .tf files and create two EC2 instances myec2 and myec3.

Note: Never rename terraform.tfstate file , as terraform will lose track of infra it created.


Desired State:
It is the configuration you write in terraform files ( .tf files ).

Current State:
Represents actual reality of the infra.

Someone can change infra via console >> creating drift between these two states.

Running terraform plan will first check current state and next , will check desired state( in .tf file ). Terraform will do a Reconciliation process and make the infra equal to the desired state.


Note: When we run terraform plan, it refreshes the infra state.

Note: Even if the instance is modified from console and is in stopped state, it will still be visible to terraform , as a change. On terraform apply , it will modify the instance and start the instance , with updated instance type.


Some configs are explicitly defined in the .tf file, while others are taken as default. 
Those default resource configs are NOT considered part of Desired state. If say security group is modified from console ( which was not mentioned in the .tf file , in the first place ), and we run terraform plan, it will show the state as No Change and Desired state = Current state.

As Best Practice, Explicitly define all the desired attributes in your configuration and keep the default attributes as minimal as possible.



Terraform Refresh:
Need not be run explicitly , as terraform automatically performs the refresh action as part of both terraform plan and terraform apply.
This could lead to state file modification.


terraform -refresh-only is a flag used with terraform apply to update Terraform's state file without making any actual changes to your infrastructure. 

Main Purpose
It synchronizes your state file with the actual state of your cloud resources, useful when:

Resources changed outside Terraform — Someone manually modified infrastructure in the cloud console, and you want Terraform's state to reflect those changes without reapplying your configuration.
Reconcile state drift — Infrastructure has drifted from what Terraform expects. This updates the state to match reality without changing anything.
Safe state updates — You want to verify current resource state and update the state file without the risk of accidentally destroying or modifying resources.


Example Scenario
1. You have an EC2 instance managed by Terraform
2. Someone manually changes the instance type in AWS Console
3. Your Terraform state is now out of sync
4. Run: terraform apply -refresh-only
5. Terraform detects the change and updates your local state
6. No resources are modified; state is now accurate


terraform apply — Makes changes to match your configuration
terraform apply -refresh-only — Only updates the state file, no infrastructure changes



terreform.lock.hcl is called dependency lock file: helps to lock specific provider version. it prevents provider version changes.
versioning of provider is recommended for production, a different version could break or create issues. 
If you delete the lock file and then run terraform init against a different provider version , it will work.

if we want to use a specific version, we can run terraform init -upgrade, this will update the lock file with the required version.

Attribute:
Each resource has its associated set of attributes.

Attributes are fields in a resource that hold the values that end up in the state file.

